welcome back again ladies and gentlemens
la zla montgomery
still with you after all these years
thanks for coming back
part six this time in our sky-high
overview of the history of the thai
chinese
not quite reaching felix baumgartner
heights but still pretty high up looking
down nonetheless
we got as far as the reign of siam's
king rama the sixth
king vajravud he was the one on duty to
witness not just the fall of the qing
dynasty and the
triumph of republicanism well sort of in
china
but also the emergence in 1921 of the
favorite bet noir of all monarchists and
liberal democratic-minded people
everywhere the communist party of china
both their association with
republicanism or communism
no matter how tenuous or non-existent it
may have been for many
the ethnic chinese residents of the
kingdom of siam
are going to be made to pay one way or
another for the events
unfolding in their ancestral homeland
and in this episode we'll look at some
of the challenges they faced in the
kingdom of siam
during this most complicated and up to
that time
destructive of periods in world history
so we left off last time with the king
of siam rama the sixth
calling out the chinese inhabitants of
his kingdom for their
similarities to the jews of europe what
could be worse than that right
and if the royal monarch was going
around inferring stuff like this
and what this meant well all those who
agreed with the king on the inside but
never dared reveal their hidden feelings
for the chinese and siam before
well now it was okay to vent and this
venting
came in all shapes and forms it all
stemmed from this
new kind of siamese nationalism espoused
by king vacher avute
rama the sixth the long-running
cozy political and economic alliance
between the monarchy
and the ethnic chinese movers and
shakers of the kingdom
that started to become a relic of the
past
and as siam became more and more
integrated with the world trade and
financial system
commerce and industry inside the kingdom
adapted
what used to be a myriad of small
enterprises that had served commerce and
industry so well
in the past began to transform into
bigger and more sophisticated operations
that quickly
grew into powerful national and regional
entities
and these entities were more readily
equipped
to engage in matters of international
trading and finance
the real story happening by this time
was not so much in industry and
manufacturing as much as it was in
agriculture
saudi arabia has its oil china
rare earth south africa has its gold and
zambia it's cobalt
madagascar of course with its vanilla
these marquee natural resources make up
only a
part of a nation's profile you know the
kingdom of siam
their great blessing was with its
agriculture in general
and rice in particular even today we all
know
fragrant thai jasmine rice i can't
remember a time
in the past few decades when i didn't
have at least a 10 pound bag of that in
my kitchen
thai rice they grew a lot of it and the
regional and global demand was quite
great
the concerted effort of the government
and siam's rice farmers to build the
country's rice export industry
was one of the greatest successes the
nation had ever seen
from a modest hundred thousand tons
exported in 1860
this grew to over a million tons of rice
per year
exported to the world and remember last
episode where
i mentioned that the government to siam
funded their own railroads and you know
didn't fall into any infrastructure
debt traps like what happened in china
and elsewhere
well it was mostly due to the revenue
the government raked in
on export taxes on rice that provided
the funding
siamese farmers made a lot of money
growing rice
they weren't like the poor peasants in
china the government provided the
impetus to these rural agriculturalists
by
opening up all this fertile land
surrounding the chao praia delta
rice production skyrocketed
and lit the fuse for this boom in thai
rice exports
but an export boom is not achieved by
rice farming and harvesting alone
that was only the front end part of the
industry
there was that part of it the farming
part
and then there was everything else that
went into the rice business before those
grains made it to your rice ball
the thai farmers grew the rice but as
far as
everything else in the rice business was
concerned
chinese merchants took care of all the
post-harvest end of the business
many urbanites take the farming aspect
of our food for granted but there's a
lot that happens after the farmer
cashes his check from the buyer of his
crop there was the milling
the sales and marketing financing
transport and logistics
there was a there was a lot to it and
the chinese of siam who engaged in that
business
had all that locked up from soup to nuts
they
made it all happen and the siamese
farmer who was utterly dependent on the
chinese
to get their crop to market chinese
merchants would wander into every single
hamlet of the rice growing regions and
deal
individually with every farmer striking
bargains for their crop
and you could be sure that these
intrepid merchants besides arranging the
purchasing of the farmer's rice
also sold a variety of manufacturers to
the farmer that were
difficult to obtain out in their neck of
the woods so
they not only bought the farmer's rice
they did a brisk business with these
rural peasants
selling the many of the necessities of
life
the milling foreigners tried to get a
piece of that action but the chinese
rice millers
dominated this end of the business and
europeans operating in siam
got bought out or squeezed out the
milling process
involved removing or separating the husk
the bran
and the germ from the rice kernels siam
burma india these were the powerhouse
rice exporters of the early 20th century
and the ports of singapore and hong kong
acted as the redistribution centers that
exported the rice to every single market
and what you began to see as far as the
chinese business community went at least
was something different than in the past
the great tycoons
and most esteemed and prosperous chinese
families in siam
had mostly all owed their exalted
positions to
marriage alliances and special
relationships with the siam
monarchy by making these alliances with
the royal house in bangkok
these chao chaomong families
enjoyed preferential treatments to
dominate whatever businesses they
engaged in
well not anymore as the 20th century
began
as i think i mentioned last time the
mechanics of international trade started
to become a little bit too
complex and interconnected with other
economies and a whole new level of
sophistication was required
to be a player in that game and nowhere
was this more apparent
than in the rice export trade and the
ones who dominated the rice business and
siam
were the doju companies no surprise
there
and as went the fortunes of the rice
business so want the economic well-being
of the kingdom of siam
that's how important rice was to the big
picture
and in their dying years the manchus
reached out to the overseas chinese
including those in siam
and tried to belatedly enlist their
support
going back to the ming dynasty those
chinese who left china for other lands
were spurned
and even considered criminals now not so
much
the overseas chinese of nanyang had
become
so formidable in their commercial and
financial success
they not only became a major source of
financial support for the dynasty
but political support as well in 1909
and better late than never the qing
court passed the nationality law
that tried to call all overseas chinese
as their own even though they were
mostly all full-time residents of their
adoptive country by now
and in the case of siam no diplomatic
relations existed yet with china
to entice them the manchus would hand
out
honorary titles and all the trappings of
honor to
any overseas chinese who would pony up
some
financing or show support for the
dynasty
and even though everyone knew it didn't
really add up to much
those tycoons and big shots in the siam
chinese community
who could afford it well they wrapped
themselves up in these robes
hats and symbols of imperial favor
who cared if the dynasty was on its last
legs these things look great in photos
hanging in the
family photo gallery and later
generations would look at these photos
and recall
the respect given to their ancestors by
the emperor of china
it was only two or three years old at
the time but in reality
trying to win over the overseas chinese
of southeast asia was
too little too late and by 1912 there
was a new sheriff in town
and besides the king of siam and the
government
they weren't so thrilled about
surrendering the nationality and
loyalties of their ethnic chinese
subjects
tax farming that system that had done so
well for the kingdom following the
introduction
of free trade in the wake of the
borrowing treaty
that started to take a back seat to a
more
bureaucratic and modern system of
taxation utilizing civil servants that
it worked a lot better for the
government and i'm thinking probably for
the siamese paying the taxes
by 1909 tax farming was retired
after a nice long run going all the way
back to king rama iii
the thing about nationalism that many
leaders
often underestimated is that it's easy
to turn it on but
terribly difficult to put out when it
starts to flame out of control
and because of all the nationalism that
started brewing
during king vatravoot's time the chinese
and even the monarchy to some extent
well they started to feel some heat
because in siam at least
disparaging the chinese sort of went
hand in hand with the nationalism
and one other small thing that had big
consequences
well after the fall of the qing chinese
women
began to follow their men folk out to
siam or they came alone or in groups
applying the same steamer routes you
know up till then
if you were some hawking guy trying his
luck out in siam
and you wanted to find yourself a
chinese wife lots of luck baby
chances were slim to none but not after
it was a new world for china and
although it took a while to fall into
the groove
women started emigrating and once it
became easier to find a chinese wife
well let's just say they were heavily
favored over
local thai women and under this kind of
dynamic
well the odds of the husband
assimilating to mainstream thai culture
it became a lot less probable for many
reasons
the fall of the despised manchu ruling
dynasty and the establishment of the
republic of china
led to a big wave of loyalty and
patriotism
especially from the overseas chinese of
nanyang
there were many who still clung to the
emperor for dear life but for most
the manchu ruling house was way past
itself by date fundraising
for the motherland became a constant
task and the organizing of these efforts
went to various community leaders who
were all business tycoons
and as we saw last time following the
bangkok strike that happened in 1912.
after 600 years or more of living side
by side with the siamese
the chinese began facing a new kind of
reality that
put them on the defensive for years to
come
they were declared disloyal to the
monarchy and therefore to the whole
country
their enthusiasm to help the new china
compared to the siamese nation was
pointed to as
proof of their lack of concern any kind
of support they
showed for sun yat-sen the republic of
china
or the whole idea of republicanism made
them
suspect of having divided loyalties
and after 1921 after the founding of the
communist party
of china and the introduction of this
ideology to the streets of bangkok
and it turned up the heat even further
the chinese of siam
were not only spread out over various
linguistic groups
they also differed in their politics as
well though most supported son yat-sen
plenty also lent support to various
warlord factions or to sons political
rivals
a very vigorous debate was carried out
in the plethora of
chinese language newspapers that were
read on the streets of bangkok and other
major cities
the kmt ran a very well-oiled machine in
bangkok
they had the most money most support
from both
community leaders and the chinese on the
street and they wielded the most
influence after the shanghai massacre of
april 1927
when the streets of china were no longer
safe for communists
leftists many fled overseas mostly to
southeast asia
where they regrouped and spread the word
about their
new up-and-coming ideology in march of
ho chi minh traveled to thailand to do
some organizing and
helped establish the communist party of
siam
and even though most ethnic chinese did
not embrace this political ideology
nor did they join up still they found
themselves
being accused of supporting them or at
least sympathizing with the communists
which didn't do anything to help
alleviate the cloud of suspicion
that hung over the chinese residents of
the country
in november 1925 rama the sixth brother
king prachatipo was crowned the new
monarch and became king rama the seventh
he had to deal with quite a lot of
things during his time on the throne
the great depression for one thing it
knocked the
entire nation of siam for a loop the
impact on the economy was
profound to say the least and then in
the throes of the depression
in 1932 came the revolution that
toppled the monarchy in siam or more
accurately downgraded the
king's power and authority from absolute
to
constitutional monarch the coup was led
by
siamese officials in the military and
one of the leaders who came to be the
face of the new post-1932 revolution in
siam
was plecum songkram a name that was
simply
too much of a mouthful for some in the
western press so he was mostly known in
the west
as field marshal fibon he had been a
royal military academy grad without any
illustrious relatives who could grease
the wheels for him
he studied overseas and france and fell
in with a group of guys who would later
join him in plotting the coup
what followed the 1932 revolution was a
major
facelift for siam there was this
rush to transform the country into a
modern nation modeled on the west
with a sophisticated government and
bureaucracy as well as military
led by elites in each power base
everything that had begun with king
mongkut
in the 1850s and 60s and carried even
further during the reigns of
chulalongkorn and vajravut were now
being taken to the next level
under this new government all these
decades the siamese monarchy had made an
unofficial alliance with the country's
chinese subjects but after the tale
started wagging the dog so to speak
particularly in the case of the 1912
bangkok general strike
the king of siam turned to the military
there's a new best friend
and now in 1932 starting on june 24th
the king of siam was done in by them
and as we all know both nature and power
abhor vacuums and standing by ready to
fill the power vacuum was a new
bureaucratic and military elite who
coalesced around a center
and things were ran sometimes
benevolently
and sometimes not so benevolently
these military officers who comprise the
topmost layers in the siam military were
german trained
very dedicated and the feeling amongst
this group was that
the western colonialists i.e britain and
france
they were the real adversaries and it
was them that the nation had to be wary
of
and besides that those two european
countries had never been forgiven
for the terms of the 1826 bernie treaty
that
among other things took the states of
kedah kelantan
perlis tarangano and patani and folded
them into that
malayan operation the british had going
on down there
as many a conqueror and successful coup
plotter figures out sooner or later
it's one thing to tear down and destroy
the hard part was to
well presumably do a better and more
equitable job than your predecessor who
you just overthrew
namely the king and not to get too deep
into thai history
the main reason i'm mentioning the 1932
revolution
is because for the chinese of siam
it was all downhill from there at least
for a while
a long while he might say chinese
emigrated to cities and towns all over
the world we know that
but from this series i want you all to
appreciate the
one thing that made thailand a special
case
when it came to its ethnic chinese
minority
from part one we remember the thai
people
t a i who migrated to present-day
thailand from
southwest china and how well since the
mongol yen dynasty in the 13th and 14th
centuries
chinese people had been coming to
thailand practically
nonstop so even before
the biggest waves of immigration
happened in the late 19th and early 20th
century
there was already quite a sizable number
of chinese
and who was chinese and who wasn't
well if everyone sent a vial of spit to
the folks at 23andme
the amount of chinese dna that could be
gleaned from
everyone living in between chiang rai
and yala province
well it wasn't a small number and in
this one respect
thailand has always been special in the
world
estimates vary but as much as 40 percent
of the people in thailand
have some of that chinese dna
whether they have any feelings for china
or not and now
they were all being tested now the time
had come to smoke out all the chinese of
siam and
get them to line up either on the side
of the king and country
or on the side of china this was going
to be
the cudgel that would whenever
convenient would be used on members of
the chinese community or the community
at large
to get them to do the right thing which
was
love this country you live and work in
and not the one your parents came from
and with all the excitement
the visiting dignitaries from china the
fall of the warlords the rise of jiang
kaishak the communists
desperately trying to make a comeback
following their evacuation of jin
gangshan and jiangxi province
these were these were heady days and
after japan invaded manchuria
on 9 18 1931 that
ratcheted up the heat a few thousand
degrees kelvin
and there was a clear differentiation
made
between the watch y'all overseas chinese
immigrants
and the look chin chinese who had long
assimilated and
identified completely as thai there was
a place for them
in the new siam and fibon and the other
leaders in the revolution
they had plenty of chinese ethnicity and
their family going way back
but they spurned the chinese for every
kind of perceived
disloyalty to the country including all
the money
earned in the kingdom that was remitted
back to china
or stayed inside their community or sent
back either to families or to all these
political causes they backed and in
these
post-great depression years siam was
having a heck of a time trying to bounce
back from these
economic hard times they too got
hit by the after effects just like most
everyone else and they were trying like
crazy to turn things around
and not being too terribly successful
and in times like this
rather than admit one's own shortcomings
or lack of a plan
ah the easy way out is to find a
scapegoat and point to that
as the ultimate cause for all the hard
times everyone was putting up with
and that many chinese were doing just
fine while so many others
i.e the local time majority were not
turned the chinese into the perfect
punching bag
and fibon along with the people's party
that he led
was gonna get a few left hooks in so
with japan
now well into its march of folly and for
a long time now doing a brisk business
in siam
they started uh sniff around
engaged the situation they knew what
they were doing in china wasn't going to
make a lot of friends over in bangkok's
chinatown
and the other predominantly chinese
parts of the country
the overall feeling was decidedly
anti-japanese very much so everyone knew
what japan was up to in manchuria and it
wasn't even 1937 yet
after 1937 when japan went out at full
bore in china the fundraising the
speeches the visiting dignitaries
there was excitement in the air on the
streets of bangkok and the other
commercial centers
about fellow siamese chinese banding
together rising up and doing their
patriotic duty
to their ancestral homeland in this most
dire of hours and part and parcel with
all this patriotic duty to help china
went to all kinds of manifestations of
anti-japanese expression this came in
the form of boycotts and
railing against japan and the press and
fibon
and his government they did not like
that
though he'll live to regret it later on
fieben and his group
opted to line up on japan's side they
bought into the whole
greater east asia co-prosperity's fair
thing and
truly believed there was a place for
siam in this brave new world
and though he hadn't asked for anything
just yet
he had his eyes on those territories he
had to give back to france and britain
with japan's help maybe they'd become
part of siam again
and for their pugnacious anti-japanese
talk
fiebun would hammer away at the chinese
beginning with what's
always the lowest hanging fruits of
suppression
the prohibition or limitation of chinese
language education
closing down chinese language newspapers
journals
man back then before the internet yeah
it was so easy
and support for japan during the 1930s
and into 1940 became
the bellwether that determined your
patriotism towards the siamese nation
those who were against japan were
against the government and the king of
siam
it's not like every single chinese in
siam felt the same way about every
single issue
even amongst the chinese there was
bitter division we remember those years
from 1911 to 1949 is 38 years of
chaos and violence in china with so many
competing factions contending for power
each and every one of those factions in
china had their branches and supporters
in siam
so just to reiterate the chinese
community in siam
did not speak with one single voice
the chinese chamber of commerce and
bangkok emerged as a
sort of a mouthpiece for the chinese
community not everyone agreed with them
but they
sort of by default became the ones who
got
dressed down by the japanese or the
government or given ultimatums and
orders
and if the chinese chamber didn't show
sufficient zeal
in supporting and promoting the
government's policies with regard to
japan that is
they heard about it and besides fibon
had outlawed
any anti-japanese actions that might be
organized by chinese community leaders
be they communist organizers or
kmt organizers or whoever and all the
fundraising that was being carried out
in a furious clip
needless to say fibon and the japanese
well they tended to frown on any local
chinese fundraising efforts
no matter what prohibitions were put in
place
wherever there was a will there was a
way and the chinese of siam
poured a lot of money into aiding
china's war effort
up to 1941 remember china alone
had been fighting back against japan
they were it
the flying tigers the avg american
volunteer group
they only came just right before pearl
harbor so china starting in 1937 was
facing the japanese onslaught when japan
was
at its most powerful most well-armed
and equipped but after the japanese took
shantou
in january 1939 the port was closed to
any
war relief supplies there were more
chinese in bangkok than japanese and
resistors
banded together in their various groups
i guess you could say up until the
bitter end in the
summer of uh 1945 the chinese of siam
did their damnedest to make life
miserable for japan there
commercially and otherwise when a strike
was called for
you actually had enforcers out there who
would mess up
any chinese who chose to defy the orders
from on high and
continue dealing with the japanese
february 1938
all the ringleaders who had been the
most vocal in their anti-japanese
rhetoric
and doing most of the organizing well
they were rounded up and
incarcerated and then in 1939 that was a
banner year
fibon changed the name of the country
from siam
to thailand the land of the thais
and this government sponsored thai
nationalism was going at a full boil
chinese language schools shuttered all
chinese newspapers
all but one out of business one by one
came the prohibitions
insults and other stuff that helped to
make the chasm between
thailand's ethnic chinese minority and
the government
more and more unbridgeable and in that
nasty year of 1939
three chinese community giants were
assassinated
within months of each other and there
were other things happening that
weren't terribly beneficial to the
chinese certain jobs
were reserved only for thais and chinese
living in
certain parts of thailand were made to
leave even if they had been living there
for generations
and in the next episode we will continue
on with fiebin's further adventures
and his capacity of commander in chief
of the royal thai army
he was effectively the dictator but as
we'll see
the japanese were constantly whispering
in his ear and becoming a major
pain in the you-know-what so please
don't give up the ship just yet
i think we could finish this topic off
next time in part seven but there's one
thing i wanted to cover
he never got to it so i'm thinking in
part eight i'll rewind and cover one
topic that's sort of a standalone but
since it has to do with the
history of the thai chinese i may as
well insert it here
sort of a bonus episode and according to
my overpriced marketing consultants i
keep on retainer they told me clearly
an eight-part series sounds way better
than a seven part series
plus yeah eight is one less syllable
this here is loslama montgomery signing
off from
los angeles california do join me next
time won't you
for another exciting episode of the
china history podcast